Hierarchical clustering
Flat clustering is efficient and conceptually simple, but as we saw in Chapter
16 it has a number of drawbacks. The algorithms introduced in Chapter
16 return a flat unstructured set of clusters, require a prespecified number
of clusters as input and are nondeterministic. Hierarchical HIERARCHICAL clustering (or
CLUSTERING hierarchic clustering) outputs a hierarchy, a structure that is more informative
than the unstructured set of clusters returned by flat clustering.1 Hierarchical
clustering does not require us to prespecify the number of clusters and most
hierarchical algorithms that have been used in IR are deterministic. These advantages
of hierarchical clustering come at the cost of lower efficiency. The
most common hierarchical clustering algorithms have a complexity that is at
least quadratic in the number of documents compared to the linear complexity
of K-means and EM (cf. Section 16.4, page 364).
This chapter first introduces agglomerative hierarchical clustering (Section 17.1)
and presents four different agglomerative algorithms, in Sections 17.2–17.4,
which differ in the similarity measures they employ: single-link, completelink,
group-average, and centroid similarity. We then discuss the optimality
conditions of hierarchical clustering in Section 17.5. Section 17.6 introduces
top-down (or divisive) hierarchical clustering. Section 17.7 looks at labeling
clusters automatically, a problem that must be solved whenever humans interact
with the output of clustering. We discuss implementation issues in
Section 17.8. Section 17.9 provides pointers to further reading, including references
to soft hierarchical clustering, which we do not cover in this book.
There are few differences between the applications of flat and hierarchical
clustering in information retrieval. In particular, hierarchical clustering
is appropriate for any of the applications shown in Table 16.1 (page 351; see
also Section 16.6, page 372). In fact, the example we gave for collection clustering
is hierarchical. In general, we select flat clustering when efficiency
is important and hierarchical clustering when one of the potential problems
1. In this chapter, we only consider hierarchies that are binary trees like the one shown