Thus far, this book has mainly discussed the process of ad hoc retrieval, where
users have transient information needs that they try to address by posing
one or more queries to a search engine. However, many users have ongoing
information needs. For example, you might need to track developments in
multicore computer chips. One way of doing this is to issue the query multicore
AND computer AND chip against an index of recent newswire articles each
morning. In this and the following two chapters we examine the question:
How can this repetitive task be automated? To this end, many systems support
standing queries. A standing query is like any other STANDING QUERY query except that it
is periodically executed on a collection to which new documents are incrementally
added over time.
If your standing query is just multicore AND computer AND chip, you will tend
to miss many relevant new articles which use other terms such as multicore
processors. To achieve good recall, standing queries thus have to be refined
over time and can gradually become quite complex. In this example, using a
Boolean search engine with stemming, you might end up with a query like
(multicore OR multi-core) AND (chip OR processor OR microprocessor).
To capture the generality and scope of the problem space to which standCLASSIFICATION
ing queries belong, we now introduce the general notion of a classification
problem. Given a set of classes, we seek to determine which class(es) a given
object belongs to. In the example, the standing query serves to divide new
newswire articles into the two classes: documents about multicore computer chips
and documents not about multicore computer chips. We refer to this as two-class
ROUTING classification. Classification using standing queries is also called routing or
FILTERING filteringand will be discussed further in Section 15.3.1 (page 335).
A class need not be as narrowly focused as the standing query multicore
computer chips. Often, a class is amore general subject area like China or coffee.
Such more general classes are usually referred to as topics, and the classificaTEXT
CLASSIFICATION tion task is then called text classification, text categorization, topic classification,
or topic spotting. An example for China appears in Figure 13.1. Standing
queries and topics differ in their degree of specificity, but the methods for