Probabilistic information
retrieval
During the discussion of relevance feedback in Section 9.1.2, we observed
that if we have some known relevant and nonrelevant documents, then we
can straightforwardly start to estimate the probability of a term t appearing
in a relevant document P(t|R = 1), and that this could be the basis of a
classifier that decideswhether documents are relevant or not. In this chapter,
we more systematically introduce this probabilistic approach to IR, which
provides a different formal basis for a retrievalmodel and results in different
techniques for setting term weights.
Users start with information needs, which they translate into query representations.
Similarly, there are documents, which are converted into document
representations (the latter differing at least by how text is tokenized, but perhaps
containing fundamentally less information, as when a non-positional
index is used). Based on these two representations, a system tries to determine
how well documents satisfy information needs. In the Boolean or
vector spacemodels of IR,matching is done in a formally defined but semantically
imprecise calculus of index terms. Given only a query, an IR system
has an uncertain understanding of the information need. Given the query
and document representations, a system has an uncertain guess of whether
a document has content relevant to the information need. Probability theory
provides a principled foundation for such reasoning under uncertainty. This
chapter provides one answer as to how to exploit this foundation to estimate
how likely it is that a document is relevant to an information need.
There is more than one possible retrieval model which has a probabilistic
basis. Here, we will introduce probability theory and the Probability Ranking
Principle (Sections 11.1–11.2), and then concentrate on the Binary Independence
Model (Section 11.3), which is the original and still most influential
probabilistic retrieval model. Finally, we will introduce related but extended
methods which use term counts, including the empirically successful Okapi
BM25weighting scheme, and BayesianNetworkmodels for IR (Section 11.4).
In Chapter 12, we then present the alternative probabilistic language model