Link analysis
The analysis of hyperlinks and the graph structure of the Web has been instrumental
in the development of web search. In this chapterwe focus on the
use of hyperlinks for ranking web search results. Such link analysis is one
of many factors considered by web search engines in computing a composite
score for a web page on any given query. We begin by reviewing some
basics of the Web as a graph in Section 21.1, then proceed to the technical
development of the elements of link analysis for ranking.
Link analysis forweb search has intellectual antecedents in the field of citation
analysis, aspects of which overlap with an area known as bibliometrics.
These disciplines seek to quantify the influence of scholarly articles by analyzing
the pattern of citations amongst them. Much as citations represent the
conferral of authority from a scholarly article to others, link analysis on the
Web treats hyperlinks from a web page to another as a conferral of authority.
Clearly, not every citation or hyperlink implies such authority conferral; for
this reason, simply measuring the quality of a web page by the number of
in-links (citations from other pages) is not robust enough. For instance, one
may contrive to set up multiple web pages pointing to a target web page,
with the intent of artificially boosting the latter’s tally of in-links. This phenomenon
is referred to as link spam. Nevertheless, the phenomenon of citation
is prevalent and dependable enough that it is feasible for web search
engines to derive useful signals for ranking from more sophisticated link
analysis. Link analysis also proves to be a useful indicator of what page(s)
to crawl next while crawling the web; this is done by using link analysis to
guide the priority assignment in the front queues of Chapter 20.
Section 21.1 develops the basic ideas underlying the use of the web graph
in link analysis. Sections 21.2 and 21.3 then develop two distinct methods for
link analysis, PageRank and HITS.