Scoring, term weighting and the
vector space model
Thus far we have dealt with indexes that support Boolean queries: a document
eithermatches or does notmatch a query. In the case of large document
collections, the resulting number of matching documents can far exceed the
number a human user could possibly sift through. Accordingly, it is essential
for a search engine to rank-order the documents matching a query. To do
this, the search engine computes, for each matching document, a score with
respect to the query at hand. In this chapterwe initiate the study of assigning
a score to a (query, document) pair. This chapter consists of threemain ideas.
1. We introduce parametric and zone indexes in Section 6.1, which serve
two purposes. First, they allow us to index and retrieve documents by
metadata such as the language in which a document is written. Second,
they give us a simple means for scoring (and thereby ranking) documents
in response to a query.
2. Next, in Section 6.2 we develop the idea of weighting the importance of a
term in a document, based on the statistics of occurrence of the term.
3. In Section 6.3 we show that by viewing each document as a vector of such
weights, we can compute a score between a query and each document.
This view is known as vector space scoring.
Section 6.4 develops several variants of term-weighting for the vector space
model. Chapter 7 develops computational aspects of vector space scoring,
and related topics.
As we develop these ideas, the notion of a query will assume multiple
nuances. In Section 6.1 we consider queries in which specific query terms
occur in specified regions of a matching document. Beginning Section 6.2 we
will in fact relax the requirement of matching specific regions of a document;
instead,wewill look at so-called free text queries that simply consist of query
terms with no specification on their relative order, importance or where in a
document they should be found. The bulk of our study of scoring will be in
this latter notion of a query being such a set of terms.