Evaluation in information
retrieval
We have seen in the preceding chaptersmany alternatives in designing an IR
system. How do we know which of these techniques are effective in which
applications? Should we use stop lists? Should we stem? Should we use inverse
document frequency weighting? Information retrieval has developed
as a highly empirical discipline, requiring careful and thorough evaluation to
demonstrate the superior performance of novel techniques on representative
document collections.
In this chapter we begin with a discussion of measuring the effectiveness
of IR systems (Section 8.1) and the test collections that are most often used
for this purpose (Section 8.2). We then present the straightforward notion of
relevant and nonrelevant documents and the formal evaluation methodology
that has been developed for evaluating unranked retrieval results (Section
8.3). This includes explaining the kinds of evaluation measures that
are standardly used for document retrieval and related tasks like text classification
and why they are appropriate. We then extend these notions and
develop furthermeasures for evaluating ranked retrieval results (Section 8.4)
and discuss developing reliable and informative test collections (Section 8.5).
We then step back to introduce the notion of user utility, and how it is approximated
by the use of document relevance (Section 8.6). The key utility
measure is user happiness. Speed of response and the size of the index are
factors in user happiness. It seems reasonable to assume that relevance of
results is the most important factor: blindingly fast, useless answers do not
make a user happy. However, user perceptions do not always coincide with
systemdesigners’ notions of quality. For example, user happiness commonly
depends very strongly on user interface design issues, including the layout,
clarity, and responsiveness of the user interface, which are independent of
the quality of the results returned. We touch on other measures of the quality
of a system, in particular the generation of high-quality result summary
snippets, which strongly influence user utility, but are not measured in the
basic relevance ranking paradigm (Section 8.7).